Add 5.17.0 release post (#178)
minetest/blog: _drafts/5.17.0-released.md

**??** Pull Requests merged | **??** Issues resolved | **??** Commits

Luanti 5.17 is here! This time, we have added the start of gamepad support,
improved modding capabilities, and the ability to export user data on Android.

You can download Luanti from [our website](https://www.luanti.org/downloads/),
check out the code on [GitHub](https://github.com/luanti-org/luanti/), or read
the [full changelog](https://docs.luanti.org/about/changelog/#5160--5170).

## Table of Contents <!-- omit in toc -->

- [Initial Gamepad Support](#initial-gamepad-support)
- [Rich Formatting in Tooltips](#rich-formatting-in-tooltips)
- [Support for Multi-track Animations in 3d Models (glTF)](#support-for-multi-track-animations-in-3d-models-gltf)
- [Android: Read-Only Access to User Data](#android-read-only-access-to-user-data)
- [What's Next?](#whats-next)

## Initial Gamepad Support

Luanti now supports using a wide range of gamepads to move around and interact
with the world. Gamepads cannot be used to interact with menus yet, so you'll
still need a mouse or touchscreen for those. You can rebind actions on the
gamepad in the settings menu. We plan on improving gamepad support in future
releases.

> While Luanti did previously have experimental support for gamepads, it was quite

Reviewer: sounds more clear IMO

```suggestion
While Luanti previously had experimental support for gamepads, it was quite
```

broken and didn’t work with most hardware. The gamepad code was rewritten to use

> modern APIs and better fit into our codebase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
modern SDL2 APIs and better fit into our codebase.
```
Not critical but perhaps interesting

Reviewer 3: I would leave it as "SDL". The gamepad handling code works better on SDL3 than SDL2 because the former has a better API design.

## Rich Formatting in Tooltips

Tooltips can now contain rich text, images, and item previews using the
[Luanti hypertext markup language](https://api.luanti.org/formspec/#markup-language).

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/5.17.0/tooltip.jpg" caption="Hypertext tooltip" %}

> ## Support for Multi-track Animations in 3d Models (glTF)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Support for Multi-track Animations in 3D Models (glTF)
```

> Luanti now supports multi-track animations in 3d models. Models may now have

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Luanti now supports multi-track animations in 3D models. Models may now have
```

several, independently controllable animations. This has two benefits:

First, it allows developers to play multiple animations on a model
simultaneously. For example, one animation may animate walking and another
swinging a sword. Previously, developers would need to create all possible

> animation combinations themselves - having walk, dig, and walk+dig animations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
animation combinations manually - walking, digging, and walking+digging, for example.
```

> Second, it allows developers to reference animations by name in the glTF file,

Reviewer 2: Is this part of "multi track animations" or a separate feature? I believe it is separate. May need a different section name.

Author: According to the pr, this comes for free with multi track animations

Reviewer 4: As far as I'm informed, tracks can have numbers or names. The PR added support for both. So this is technically correct because named animations were not accessible before.

rather than start and end frames. This makes it easier to just take such files

> off-the-shelf, without needing to bake everything into a single track and mess

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
rather than start and end frames. This makes it easier to take such files
off-the-shelf without needing to bake everything into a single track and mess
```

around with frame numbers.

## Android: Read-Only Access to User Data

Since Android 12, Android security policies have restricted access to Luanti's
user data. To export worlds and mods, users would need to connect their
phone to a computer.

Luanti now exposes user data, including worlds, to other apps. This means that
you can use your files app to get your world and share it with others.

Currently, this only allows users to export their worlds. In the future, we
plan to add write access, which would allow importing worlds and mods, as well as
developing mods and games on Android.

## What's Next?

Take a look at the [pull request list](https://github.com/luanti-org/luanti/pulls) and

> [milestones](https://github.com/luanti-org/luanti/milestones) to see what the community and developers are working on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Take a look at the [pull request list](https://github.com/luanti-org/luanti/pulls) to see what the community and developers are
working on, and be sure to look out for [upcoming formspec features](https://github.com/luanti-org/luanti/pulls?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Apr+label%3A%22Feature+%E2%9C%A8%22+label%3AFormspec), [new visual effects](https://github.com/luanti-org/luanti/pull/15417),
and [more](https://github.com/luanti-org/luanti/milestone/35)!

Author: The visual effects PR has been open for a number of releases, I wouldn't want to promise it. Especially as it needs a bit of a split/rework from the sounds of it

I don't see anything especially huge in the formspecs PR list

Reviewer: Idk, it just sounds less boring than the same exact paragraph we've had for the last two release blog posts

> The visual effects PR has been open for a number of releases, I wouldn't want to promise it.

Maybe mention SSCSM in its place then? The recent work on that has been promising

Reviewer 4: The milestone assigned to an issue or PR is subject to change multiple times. I would not recommend linking to the overview page.
